- Hi it's me, Tim Dodd,
the Everyday Astronaut.
I'm here at SpaceX's
brand new launch facility
in Boca Chica, Texas
to check out the holy
grail of rocket engines
and that SpaceX's upcoming Raptor engine.
An engine like this has
never actually been used
on a rocket before.
Now this is a methane powered full flow
staged combustion cycle engine.
Talking about a rocket
engine that's this complex
can be really intimidating.
And in order to put it into
context against other engines
and other engine cycles
we're gonna do a full
comparison of the Raptor engine
versus a bunch of other engines
including SpaceX's current workhorse
the Merlin engine against the RS-25,
the space shuttle main engine.
the F-1 engine that powered the Saturn 5.
The RD-180
and Blue Origin's BE-4
that also runs on methane.
And as if the full flow
of staged combustion cycle
wasn't enough, SpaceX is also
doing something else unique.
They're powering that
thing with liquid methane
and that's something that's
actually never been done
on an orbital class rocket.
So we're gonna take a look at
the characteristics of methane
and see if we can figure out
why SpaceX chose methane
instead of any other common propellant.
Now this engine isn't
really the best at anything.
It's not the most powerful.
It's not the highest thrust
to weight ratio of any engine.
It's not even the most efficient
but it does a lot of
things really really well.
So by the end of this video
hopefully we have all
the context understand
why the Raptor engine is special
how it compares to other rockets
why it's using liquid methane
and then hopefully we'll
know if it really is
the king of rocket engines.
Let's get started.
(electronic music)
- [Voice over] Three, two,
one, blastoff. (mumbles)
- In case you didn't notice
when you clicked on this video,
this is a very, very long video.
Sorry, not sorry,
but if you're anything like me
you keep hearing a lot of
hype about the Raptor engine
and you want to appreciate it
but you don't even know where to start.
Well, I've spent quite a
while really studying up
on the subject so I can
lay down a good foundation
in order to help us really
truly fully appreciate
the Raptor engine.
Well, and quite frankly
all rocket engines.
And if you're anything like me
maybe you've stared at
diagrams like this or like this
or like this one for hours until
you feel like your
head's going to explode.
So in order to avoid that
I've actually whipped up
some really simple versions
of rocket engine cycles
for all of us to enjoy
which will hopefully help us
grasp these crazy concepts.
But in case this isn't your first rodeo
here's the timestamps
if you want to jump to a certain section.
There's also links in the
description to each section
as well as an article
version of this entire video
at my website, Everydayastronaut.com
in case you want to
study some of the numbers
a little more in depth
or see sources of some of the material.
Now we're gonna start off with
a super quick physics lesson
but bear with me.
We're gonna dive in and get
plenty of nitty gritty details.
Okay.
Let's start off with this.
Rockets are basically just propellant
with some skin around
it to keep it in place
and they have a thing on the back
that can throw said
propellant really, really fast
and to way oversimplify it even more,
the faster you can throw
that propellant the better.
Now the easiest way to do this
is by storing all the
propellant in your tanks
under really high
pressure then put a valve
on one end of the tank
and a propelling nozzle that
accelerates the propellant
into workable thrust.
Done.
No crazy pumps or complicated systems
just open a valve and let her rip.
This is called a pressure
fed rocket engine
and there's a few main types:
cold gas, monoprop and
bipropellant pressure fed engines.
You'll often find these used
in reaction control systems
because they're simple,
reliable, and they react quickly.
But pressure fed engines
have one big limiting factor.
Pressure always flows from high to low
so the engine can never be higher pressure
than the propellant tanks.
In order to store propellant
under high pressure,
your tanks will need to be strong
and therefore thicker, and thicker,
and heavier, and heavier.
Look at composite overwrapped
pressure vessels or COPDs.
They're capable of storing
gases at almost 10000 PSI
or 700 bar.
And despite this there's still
a limited amount of propellant
and pressure they can store.
And this does not scale up very well
when you're trying to
deliver a payload to orbit.
So smart rocket scientists
quickly realized
in order to make the rocket
as lightweight as possible
there's really only one
thing they could do:
increase the enthalpy.
That would be a great metal band name.
You're welcome Internet.
Enthalpy is basically the relationship
between volume pressure and temperature.
A higher pressure and temperature
inside the combustion chamber
equals higher efficiency
and more mass shoved
through the rocket engine
equals more thrust.
So in order to shove more
propellant into the engine
you could either increase
the pressure in the tanks
or just shoot the propellant
into the combustion chamber
with a really high powered pump.
The second option sounds
like a pretty good idea.
But pumps moving hundreds
of liters of fuel per second
require a lot, and boy do I mean,
a lot of energy to power them.
So what if you took a tiny rocket engine,
and aimed it right a turbine
to spin it up really, really fast?
You can exchange some of
the rocket propellant's
chemical energy for kinetic energy
which could then be used to
spin these powerful pumps.
Welcome to turbo pumps
and the staged combustion cycle.
But you've still got some
limiting factors here
like how high pressure always
wants to go to low pressure
and how heat has that
habit of melting stuff.
So you've got to keep
all these things in check
while trying to squeeze every bit of power
out of your engine.
There's actually a lot
of different variations
of the cycles that we could talk about
but I'm going to stick
with the three most common
or at least the three that matter the most
when putting the Raptor into context.
We have the gas generator cycle
the partial flow staged combustion cycle
and lastly we'll look at
the full flow staged combustion cycle
and perhaps in a future video
I'll try and do a full rundown
of all liquid fueled rocket engines
including fun new alternatives
like the electric pump fed engine
seen on Rocket Lab's Electron rocket.
(slow music)
Let's start with the gas generator cycle
known as the open cycle.
This is probably one of
the most common types
of liquid fueled rocket engine
used on orbital rockets.
It's definitely more complicated
than a pressure fed system
but it's fairly simple,
well at least compared to their
closed cycle counterparts.
Now I'm gonna way, way oversimplify this
so it's as easy to grasp
as humanly possible.
In real life, there's
literally dozens of valves,
a hive of wires,
and extra tiny little pipes everywhere,
helium to back pressure the tanks
fuel flowing through the nozzle
and the combustion chamber to cool it
and there is an ignition
source for the preburner
and the combustion chamber.
But again for the purpose
of making this as simple
and as digestible as possible,
just know there's a lot of stuff missing
from these diagrams.
But for now we're going to focus
on the flow of these engines
so we can grasp that concept first.
The gas generator cycle works by pumping
the fuel and oxidizer into
the combustion chamber
using a turbo pump.
The turbo pump has a few main parts
a mini rocket engine called the preburner,
a turbine connected to a shaft
and then a pump or two
that push propellant
into the combustion chamber.
Now you might hear the turbo pump assembly
called the power pack because it really is
what powers the engine.
In the open cycle system,
the spent propellant from the preburner
is simply dumped overboard
and does not contribute
any significant thrust.
This makes it less
efficient since the fuel
and oxidizer used to spin the
pumps is basically wasted.
Now the funny thing about a turbo pump
is that it kind of has a chicken
and egg syndrome situation
that makes it pretty difficult to start up
since the preburner that
powers the turbo pump
needs high pressure fuel
and oxidizer to operate.
So the preburner requires
the turbo pumps to spin
before it can get up to full
operational pressure itself
but the turbo pumps need
the preburner to fire
in order to spin the turbo pumps.
But the preburner needs
the turbo pumps to ...
Yeah.
You can see where this is going.
This makes starting a gas
generator pretty tricky.
There's a few ways to do this
but we don't need to get
into all that in this video.
That sounds like a fun topic
for future videos though.
So back to the turbo pumps.
Remember pressure always
flows from high to low
so the turbo pumps need
to be a higher pressure
than the chamber pressure.
And this means the inlets
leading to the preburner
is actually the highest pressure point
in the entire rocket engine.
Everything else downstream
is lower pressure
but notice something here.
Take a look at SpaceX's Merlin engine
which runs on RP-1 or rocket propellant 1
and liquid oxygen.
Notice how black the smoke is
coming out of the preburner exhaust.
Why would it be so sooty
compared to the main combustion chamber
which leaves almost no visible exhaust?
Well that's because rocket propellant
can get super hot like thousands
and thousands of degrees Celsius.
So to make sure the
temperature isn't so hot
that it melts the turbine
and the entire turbo pump assembly,
they need to make sure it's cool enough
to continually operate.
Running at the perfect fuel
and oxidizer ratio is the most efficient
and releases the most energy
but it also produces a
crazy amount of heat.
So in order to keep the temperatures low
you can run the preburner at
a less than optimal ratio.
So either too much fuel known as fuel rich
or too much oxidizer or oxygen rich.
Running an RP-1 engine fuel rich means
you'll see some unburned fuel
appearing as dark clouds of soot.
the highly pressurized
unburned carbon molecules bond
and form polymers which is
a process known as coking.
This soot starts to stick
to everything it touches
and can block injectors or even do damage
to the turbine itself.
So what if you didn't want to waste
all that highly pressurized propellant?
I mean after all since it's running cooler
by being fuel rich doesn't that mean
there's a bunch of unburned
fuel literally being wasted?
What if you could just
pipe that hot exhaust gas
and put it into the combustion chamber?
Welcome to the closed cycle.
The closed cycle or
staged combustion cycle
increases engine efficiency by using
what would normally be lost exhausts
and connects it to the combustion chamber
to help increase pressure
and also increase efficiency.
So let's take the Merlin engine
and try closing the loop.
Let's take the exhaust
and just pipe it straight
into the combustion chamber.
Uh-oh, oh no!
We just put a bunch of soot
and clogged all the injectors.
You do not go to space today my friend.
But there's a few
solutions to this problem
so let's see how the Soviets solved it.
The first operational closed
cycle engine they made
was the NK-15 design for
their N-1 moon rocket.
They later upgraded it to the NK-33
and then many versions
from there stemmed out
including the RD-180
which is what is used
on the Atlas 5 today.
Since the NK-15 and NK-33
runs on RP-1 like the Merlin
you can't run your preburners fuel rich
because of the coking problem.
So if you want to create a
closed cycle engine with RP-1,
the answer is running the
preburner oxygen rich.
Easy as that, right?
Well now you're blasting superheated
highly pressurized gaseous oxygen
which will turn just
about anything into soup
right at your precision machine
crazy low tolerance turbine blade.
Doing so is actually considered impossible
by the United States,
and they basically gave up on trying.
They didn't think a metal alloy existed
that could withstand these
crazy crazy conditions,
and they didn't believe the Soviets
had made such an efficient
and powerful RP-1-powered engine
until after the collapse
of the Soviet Union
and the US engineers got to see them
and test them out firsthand.
But the Soviets had indeed
worked their butts off,
and they had made a special
alloy that can magically
with science withstand
the crazy conditions
of an oxygen rich preburner.
With a closed cycle engine,
you don't just use some
fuel and some oxidizer
and burn that in the
preburner to spin the turbine.
You actually shoot all
of the rich propellant
through the turbine.
So with an oxygen rich cycle
all of the oxygen actually
goes through the preburner
and just the right amount of
fuel goes to the preburner.
You only need enough to give the turbine
the right amount of energy
to spin the pumps fast enough
to get the right pressures
for the preburner
and the combustion chamber
to make the right amount of power
to shoot the thing into space.
Just crazy.
So back to this oxygen rich preburner.
That now hot gaseous oxygen is forced
into the combustion chamber
where it meets liquid fuel.
They meet and go boom
and we get a nice clean and efficient burn
without really wasting any propellant.
But still like all engines
the chamber pressure
can not be higher than the pump pressure
so the pumps actually have a lot of weight
on their tiny little metal shoulders.
Now if you're sitting there thinking
that the United States just sat back
and let the Soviets have
all the closed cycle glory,
you'd be wrong.
It took the United States
a little bit longer
but they eventually figured
out a closed cycle engine.
But it was very different
from the oxygen rich cycle.
The United States pursued
a closed loop cycle
but they went with a fuel rich preburner.
But wait, we just learned
that fuel rich preburners'
exhaust is so sooty
that it pretty much ruins anything, right?
Well sure if you're using RP-1
or any other carbon heavy fuel
that's definitely going to be the outcome.
So the United States went with
a different fuel: hydrogen.
Okay, so now we've avoided the problem
of blasting crazy hot high pressure oxygen
at anything dear and precious
but now we've opened
up a new can of worms.
Hydrogen is significantly
less dense than RP-1
or liquid oxygen.
It's so much less dense,
it takes a huge and
really complex turbo pump
to flow the right amount of hydrogen
into the combustion chamber.
Since RP-1 and LOX are
relatively similar in density
and in the ratios they can
be run on a single shaft
using a single preburner.
Because of this the
engineers at Rocketdyne
pursued an engine known as the RS-25
which would go on to
power the space shuttle.
They realized that because
of the large difference
between the pumps they might as well have
two different preburners,
one for the hydrogen pump
and one for the oxygen pump.
So that's what they did.
But having two separate shafts
created another new problem.
Now engineers were putting high pressure
hot gaseous hydrogen on the same shaft
right next door to the liquid oxygen pump.
If some of that hydrogen would
leak out of the preburner
it would start a fire in the LOX pump
which is catastrophically bad.
Hydrogen is also very hard to contain
because it's so not dense,
un-dense, lightweight
it likes to sneak through cracks
and get out anywhere it can.
So engineers had to make an elaborate seal
to keep the hot hydrogen
from sneaking out.
The seal required for this
is called a purge seal
and it's actually pressurized by helium
so that it's the highest
point of pressure.
So if the seal leaks it
just leaks inert helium.
It's genius but take a look at
how different the LOX turbo pump
and the hydrogen turbo pump seals look.
You can tell how much
more engineering time
and effort had to go
into the hydrogen seals.
I mean the people that think
of this stuff are nuts.
The RS-25 is still considered to be
about the best engine ever made
with a fairly high thrust to weight ratio
and unmatched efficiency.
Okay now that we've talked all about
the dual preburner fuel rich RS-25,
here's a simplified diagram of that.
Now I didn't bother making
the fuel pumps different sizes
and I just want to focus on the flow here
and help make that as simple as possible.
But do note both preburners
of the RS-25 run fuel rich
so although they might look the same
they power different pumps
and I'll just let this
run here for a few seconds
so you can study it for a bit
but don't worry we'll also
put all these up on screen
at the same time once we cover them all.
So the closed cycle improves
the overall performance of the engine
and is highly advantageous.
So how can it get any better than this?
We're finally ready to talk about
the full flow staged combustion cycle
which basically just combines
the two cycle methods
we just talked about.
With the full flow
staged combustion cycle,
you take two preburners
one that runs fuel rich
and one that runs oxygen rich.
The fuel rich preburner
powers the fuel pump
and the oxygen rich preburner
powers the LOX pump.
This means the full flow
staged combustion cycle
needs to tackle the oxygen rich problems
which again is solved by developing
very strong metal alloys.
So SpaceX developed their
own super alloys in house
that they named SX500.
According to Elon Musk it's
capable of over 800 bar
of hot oxygen rich gas.
That may have been one
of the biggest hurdles
in developing the Raptor engine.
Luckily the fuel rich side only pumps fuel
so if some of that hot
fuel leaks through the seal
on the shaft it just comes
in contact with more fuel
which is kind of no big deal.
So no need for one of those
really really elaborate seals.
Full flow likely wouldn't work with RP-1
due to the coking problems
with a fuel rich preburner
but other fuels are still
valid to use this design.
But more on that in a minute.
The advantage of the system
is that since both the fuel
and the oxidizer arrive
in the combustion chamber
as a hot gas there's better combustion
and hotter temperatures can be achieved.
There's also less of a need
for that crazy ceiling system
as we mentioned earlier
and that's definitely a good thing
when you plan to reuse your engine
over and over with little
to no refurbishment
between flights.
And lastly because there's an
inherent increase in mass flow
or how quickly all the propellant
is shooting into the preburner
the turbines can run cooler
and at lower pressures
because the ratio of
fuel an oxidizer needed
to spin the turbo pumps is much lower.
And think of it this way
in an open cycle you only want to use
as little fuel and oxidizer as possible
in the preburner since it's all wasted
and you want it to be
as hot as withstandable
to make it more efficient
but with the full flow
cycle all of the fuel
and all of the oxidizer
goes through the preburners
so you can burn just exactly
as much propellant as necessary
to power the turbo pumps.
But the cool thing is your
fuel to oxidizer ratios
will be so crazy fuel rich
and crazy oxygen rich
that the temperatures at the
turbines will be much lower
and this means longer lifespans
for the turbo pump assembly.
It also means more combustion happens
in the combustion chamber
and less in the preburner.
Now here's the crazy part.
Only three engines have demonstrated
the full flow staged
combustion cycle ever.
In the 60s the Soviets developed an engine
called the RD-270 which never flew
and in the early 2000s
Aerojet and Rocketdyne
worked on an integrated
powerhead demonstrator called
wait for it, the Integrated
Powerhead Demonstrator,
which again never made
it past the test stand.
And the third attempt to developing
a full flow staged combustion cycle engine
is SpaceX's Raptor engine.
Ta-da, that's right.
The Raptor engine is
only the third attempt
at making this crazy type of engine.
It's the first to ever do any type of work
and leave a test stand
and fingers crossed,
it'll be the first full flow
staged combustion cycle engine
to reach orbit.
Well actually just about
anything this engine does
will be a first.
This means SpaceX had to tackle
some crazy crazy problems.
I mean not only that
same problem that plagues
oxidizer rich cycles
like having to have a really
really strong metal alloy.
They also had to learn how to control
two different preburners
and two different cycles
to create the highest pressures
of any chamber pressure ever.
They just beat the RD-180's
record of about 265 bar
when they hit 270 bar
and they're not even done.
They're hoping for 300 bar
inside the combustion chamber.
That's nuts and we'll talk
more about that in a second
but before we move on now
that we've done a rundown
on all these engines cycle types
let's put them all up on screen
and let them run for a bit
so you can watch each one
and compare them side by side.
I know for myself it helps a lot
to see them all together
on the same screen
at the same time.
(slow music)
Since the Raptor engine can't run
a fuel rich preburner using RP-1,
you'd think the next most
logical choice would be hydrogen.
Well SpaceX didn't opt for
either RP-1 or hydrogen.
They went with liquid methane.
So now we finally have
another topic to touch on.
Why did SpaceX choose liquid methane
for the Raptor engine?
What are the qualities
that make it advantageous
over hydrogen or RP-1?
(dramatic music)
Today no liquid methane
or otherwise known as methylox engine
has gone to orbit.
So what qualities does it
have that make it desirable?
Let's take a look at methane
compared to RP-1 and hydrogen.
Let's put methane in
between RP-1 and hydrogen.
You'll see why here really quickly.
So let's start off with
perhaps the biggest factor
when designing your first stage,
the density of the propellant.
Having a denser fuel means
that tanks are smaller
and lighter for a given mass of fuel.
A smaller tank equals a lighter rocket.
So here's the density of these three fuels
measured in grams per liter.
In other words how much does
one liter of this stuff weigh
or really what's its mass.
Starting off with RP-1, one
liter is around 813 grams.
RP-1 is 11 times more dense than hydrogen
which is only 70 grams per liter
and methylox is right in the
middle at 422 grams per liter.
Remember how airships or zeppelins
used to be filled with hydrogen
to make them lighter than air?
Well, that's because hydrogen
is so much less dense in our atmosphere
it makes for an excellent
albeit really flammable gas for a balloon.
I mean we all remember
the Hindenburg, right?
It should also be noted
that 813 grams per liter
is an average for RP-1
but SpaceX chills their
RP-1 in their Falcon 9
and Falcon Heavy for about a
2 to 4% increase in density.
But historically RP-1's density
is right around that 813 grams per liter.
So in the case of density
methane is kind of right in
the middle of the two others
but there's more to it than just density.
We also need to take into consideration
the ratio of how much fuel is burned
compared to how much oxidizer is burned.
This is the oxidizer to fuel ratio.
So here's where things get
a little more interesting
and the tables turn just a little bit.
Rocket engineers have to take into account
the mass of the fuel
and the corresponding weight of the tanks
so they don't actually burn propellant
at the perfect stoichiometric
combustion ratio.
They find the perfect happy medium
that balances tank size with thrust output
and specific impulse.
Let's look at the mass ratios for fuel
and oxidizer that the
engineers have come up with.
So for these numbers RP-1 is
burned at 2.7 grams of oxygen
to one gram of RP-one.
Hydrogen burns at 6 grams of
oxygen to 1 gram of hydrogen
and methane burns at 3.7 grams of oxygen
to one gram of methane.
These numbers can now help offset a little
the massive difference in density.
So let's visualize this to
help make it easier to digest.
Liquid oxygen is 1141 grams per liter.
It's a little more dense than RP-1.
So burning LOX and RP-1
at a 2.7 to one ratio
for every liter of LOX you'd need
a little over half a liter of RP-1.
Next up let's do hydrogen.
Now with hydrogen being 11
times less dense than RP-1
you'd think it'd need a
tank that's 11 times bigger.
But luckily engineers have
found that it pays to burn LOX
and hydrogen at a 6 to 1
ratio for a good compromise.
This means for each liter of LOX
you'd need 2.7 liters of hydrogen
so your fuel tank needs
to be approximately
five times larger compared to RP-1.
So yeah that helps.
That's why when we look at
a hydrogen powered Delta IV
versus an RP-1 powered Falcon 9
you can see the fuel tank is
much smaller than the LOX tank
on the Falcon 9 but the Delta
IV is about the opposite.
The LOX tank is much
smaller than its fuel tank.
So now let's take a look at methane.
And this one gets kind of interesting.
LOX is 2.7 times more
dense than liquid methane
but the burn ratio is 3.7 grams of oxygen
to one gram of methane.
So you need 0.73 liters of
methane for every liter of LOX.
In other words your fuel tank
would need to be about
40% bigger for methylox
than it would need to be for RP-1
despite RP-1 actually
being almost twice as dense
and compared to hydrogen
its fuel tank would be
about 3.7 times smaller.
So the fuel to oxidizer ratio
helps make a methane fuel
tank a lot closer to an RP-1
tank than it is to a hydrogen tank.
Another huge variable
with any rocket engine
is how efficient it is.
This is measured in
specific impulse or ISP
but you can think of it
kind of like a fuel economy
of a gas powered car.
So a high specific
impulse would be similar
to a high mile per gallon
or kilometer per liter.
The best way to think of specific impulse
is to imagine you had one
kilogram of propellant
for how many seconds can the engine push
with 9.8 newtons of force.
The longer it can sip on that fuel
while still pushing that hard
the higher its specific impulse
and therefore the more work
it can do with the same amount of fuel.
So again kind of like its fuel economy.
So the higher the specific impulse
the less fuel it takes to
do the same amount of work
which is a good thing.
A fuel efficient engine
is extremely important
and now due to the
molecular way of each fuel
and their energy released when burned
there's a different potential
for how quickly the
exhaust gas can be expelled
out the nozzle.
This means each fuel has
a different theoretical specific impulse.
In ideal and perfect world
an RP-1 powered engine
could achieve about 370 seconds.
An ideal hydrogen powered
engine could get 532 seconds
and guess what?
A methane powered engine
is right in the middle
with 459 seconds.
Real world examples of this are much lower
with RP-1 engine seeing around 350 seconds
like the Merlin 1D Vacuum run 380 seconds
for a methane powered engine
like the Raptor vacuum might be someday
and about 465 seconds for
a hydrogen powered engine
like the RL-10B-2.
Next, let's talk about
how hot each fuel burns.
A fuel that burns cooler
is easier on the engine
and potentially makes
for a longer lifespan.
RP-1 can burn up to 3670 Kelvin,
hydrogen 3070 Kelvin,
and if you haven't guessed it by now,
methane is again between
the two at 3550 Kelvin.
Speaking of thermal considerations
let's look at the boiling
point for each of these fuels
or at what point does
the liquid fuel boil off
and turn into a gas.
Since all of these fuels need to remain
in their liquid state
in order to stay dense
the higher the temperature
the easier it is to store the fuel.
A higher boiling point also means less
or even no insulation on the tanks
to keep the propellant from boiling off.
And of course less insulation
means lighter tanks.
RB1 has a very high boiling point
even higher than water at 490 Kelvin.
Hydrogen on the other
hand is near absolute zero
at a crazy cold 20 Kelvin.
That's insanely cold and it
takes serious consideration
to keep anything at that temperature
and like the Goldilocks it is
methane is between the two at 111 Kelvin
which although that's still very cold
and requires thermal considerations
it at least boils off at a
temperature similar to LOX
so there is that
and because it's so close
to the temperature of LOX
the tanks can share a common dome
which makes the vehicle lighter.
LOX and hydrogen's
temperatures very so wildly
that LOX will boil off hydrogen
and the hydrogen will freeze LOX solid.
Now, on to the exhausts.
What are the byproducts of
combustion with these engines?
RP-1 is really the only one of these three
that really pollutes
with any unburned carbons
being left in our atmosphere
alongside with some water vapor
but hydrogen only produces water vapor
and methane produces some carbon dioxide
and water vapor as well.
But an interesting note
now believe it or not
as far as greenhouse gases go,
water in the upper
atmosphere can be pretty bad
but I'll be doing a video in the future
all about how much rockets pollute
talking about their air pollution,
also their ocean pollution
and even space debris is a consideration.
So stand by because I think that video
is going to be awesome.
Now one metric that we're just kind of
going to gloss over really quick
and talk about it generally is the cost.
And these tend to vary considerably
and it's actually really hard to pin down
the exact prices reliably.
So for the considerations RP-1
is basically just a
highly refined jet fuel
which jet fuel is a
highly refined kerosene
which kerosene is a highly refined diesel.
So it's safe to assume it's going to be
more expensive than diesel.
Hydrogen is also relatively expensive
despite being abundant.
Refining it storing it
and transporting it can be hard
but methane on the other hand
is basically the same thing
as natural gas and can
be relatively cheap.
Now when you're talking about
buying literally tons of fuel
the fuel costs can add up quickly
so although the cost of fuel
shouldn't factor in too much
it certainly is a consideration
but without hard data on this one
I don't even want to put it on our chart.
So instead let's talk about
the more important aspect of the fuel
that's manufacturing it.
And here's where we get into specifically
why SpaceX sees methane as an important
or even a necessary part
of the company's future.
SpaceX's ultimate goals
are to develop a system
capable of taking humans
out to Mars and back
over and over.
The Martian atmosphere is CO2 rich.
Now combine that with water
mining from the surface
and subsurface water on Mars
through electrolysis
and the Sabatier process
the Martian atmosphere can
be made into methane fuel
so you don't have to take
all the fuel you need
to get home with you.
You can make it right there
using Mars's resources.
This is called in situ
resource utilization or ISRU.
Now you might be thinking,
"Well, if there is water
can't you just make hydrogen
on the surface of Mars for your fuel?"
Well, yes but one of the
biggest problems with hydrogen
and long duration missions is
the boiling point of hydrogen.
Remember, it takes serious considerations
to maintain hydrogen in a liquid state
and that's necessary
to be useful as a fuel
so for SpaceX methane
makes a lot of sense.
It's fairly dense meaning the rocket sizes
are pretty reasonable.
It's fairly efficient, it burns clean
and it makes for a highly reusable engine.
It burns relatively cool
helping expand the lifespan of an engine
which again is good for usability.
It's cheap and easy to produce
and can be easily reproduced
on the surface of Mars.
(slow music)
Okay.
Yeah.
We finally made it this far.
and now that we have a strong grasp
of how different engine cycles operate
and the fuels they use
we can finally line
them all up side by side
and compare their metrics
to help us appreciate
where each engine sits.
So now we're going to lineup each engine
by their fuel type and their cycles.
So let's start off with SpaceX's
open cycle Merlin engine
that powers their Falcon 9
and Falcon Heavy rockets.
NPO Energomash's
oxygen rich closed cycle RD-180
that we see power the Atlas 5 rocket
and Rocketdyne's open cycle F-1
that powers a Saturn 5
which all three of these
engines run on RP-1.
Then we have SpaceX's full flow
staged combustion cycle Raptor engine
that will power the Starship
and Super Heavy booster
and then we have Blue
Origin's closed cycle
oxygen rich methane powered BE-4 engine
that will power their New Glenn rocket
and ULA's upcoming Vulcan rocket
and then we have Aerojet
Rocketdyne's closed cycle
fuel rich RS-25 engine that
powered the space shuttle
and will power the upcoming SLS rocket
which runs on hydrogen.
A few quick notes here.
The Raptor and the BE-4 as
of the making of this video
are still in development
so the numbers we have here
are either their current state of progress
like the Raptor which
is constantly improving
literally every day
and in the case of the BE-4,
those are the target goals for the engine
which Blue Origin has yet to hit.
So just keep that in
mind that these numbers
are definitely subject to change
and now because of this
don't forget to check in
with the article version
attached in the description of this video.
This video will likely date itself
with some of these numbers
and I can't update this video
but I can update the website
when more info comes through.
So if you're looking to use any
of these numbers as a source
please, please, please
double check the website
for any updates.
Another fun note quick
is look at the RD-180.
Now don't be confused.
This is a single engine
it just has two combustion chambers.
There's only a single turbo pump
that splits its power into
two combustion chambers.
The Soviet Union was able to solve
the crazy hot oxygen
rich closed cycle problem
but they were unable to
solve combustion instability
of large engines.
So instead of one large combustion chamber
they made multiple small ones.
So first up
let's take a look at their total
thrust output at sea level.
Since all these engines run at sea level
that's probably a fair
place to compare them.
Let's go from the least amount of thrust
to the most for fun.
The Merlin produces 0.84
meganewtons of thrust.
The RS-25 produces 1.86 meganewtons.
The Raptor currently is at 2 meganewtons.
The BE-4 is hoping to hit 2.4 meganewtons.
The RD-180 3.83 meganewtons
and the F-1 is still the king out of these
at 6.77 meganewtons.
Now there was an engine called the RD-170
which actually produced
more thrust than the F-1
but since it barely flew
I figured it wasn't as
relevant in this lineup.
I thought it'd probably a
good idea to go with engines
that have actually been used a lot.
Thrust is great but what's
maybe just as important
when designing rocket is
the thrust to weight ratio
or how heavy the engine is
compared to how much thrust it produces.
A higher thrust to weight ratio engine
ultimately means less dead weight
the rocket needs to lug around.
Let's start from the
lowest to highest here.
The lowest is actually the
space shuttles RS-25 at 73 to 1.
Then there is the RD-180 which is 78 to 1.
Then we have the BE-4
at around 80 to 1 but
keep in mind we don't actually have
a really good number on this.
So there might be some wiggle room there.
Then the F-1 is 94 to 1,
then we have the Raptor which
is at about 107 to 1 for now.
And lastly the Merlin is
actually the leader here
with an astonishing 198 to
1 thrust to weight ratio.
Yeah, that thing is a powerhouse.
Okay.
Thrust is great and all
but who cares how powerful an engine is
if it's terribly inefficient.
So next up let's check
out their specific impulse
which again is measured in seconds.
So starting with the
least efficient engine
which is the F-1 engine
at 263 to 304 seconds
then the Merlin engine
at 282 to 311 seconds.
Then we get the RD-180 at
311 seconds to 338 seconds
and somewhere in that
same ballpark is the BE-4
which is around 310 to 340 seconds.
Next up is the Raptor engine
which is 330 seconds
to around 350 seconds,
and lastly the king
here by far is the RS-25
which is 366 to 452 seconds.
Wow.
Now one of the factors
that affect both the thrust
and specific impulse is chamber pressure.
Now generally
the higher the chamber
pressure the more thrust
and potentially more
efficient the engine can be
so higher chamber pressures
let an engine be smaller
for a given thrust level
also improving their
thrust to weight ratio.
The baby here is actually the F-1
which only had 70 bar in
this chamber pressure.
Now, I do need to pause here for a second
and remind you that 70
bar is still 70 times
the atmospheric pressure or
the same amount of pressure
you'd experience at 700 meters underwater.
Yikes.
Okay so even the lowest chamber pressure
is still mind-bogglingly high.
So next up is the Merlin engine
at 97 bar then the BE-4
will be around 135-ish bar
then the RS-25 which is 206 bar
then the RD-180 which has been considered
the king of operational
engines at about 257 bar
that is until the Raptor engine
which is now kind of online
which is considered the new
king of chamber pressure
at 270 bars currently and
they hope to get that thing
up to 300 bar.
Again, 300 bar is like being
three kilometers deep in the ocean.
I can't even fathom.
Okay, that's enough of the
specs of these engines.
Now, let's look at their
operational considerations
starting with their approximate cost.
Now again this can be
kind of hard to nail down,
so these are the best estimates
that I could come up with.
These numbers do factor in inflation
to make them all in
today's dollars though.
Let's go with the most expensive,
and work our way down to
the least expensive engine.
The most expensive engine
in the lineup is the RS-25
which has a sticker price of
over $50 million per engine.
Yikes.
Then we have the F-1 which was
about $30 million per engine
then the RD-180 which is
$25 million per engine
then the BE-4 which is
around $8 million per engine.
and for the Raptor Elan has mentioned
he thinks he can produce
the Raptor for cheaper than
or close to the Merlin engine
if they can remove a lot of the complexity
that the current engine has.
So for now we're gonna say $2 million
is a pretty decent ballpark.
Then we have the Merlin engine
which is less than a million I think.
Okay, well cost is one thing
but another strong consideration
for the cost of the engine
is whether or not it's reusable.
And here only the RD-180 and
the F-1 were not reusable
or at least never reused
which is different than
all these other engines
which will all be reused multiple times.
The RS-25 was reused over and over
with the record being 19
flights out of a single engine.
Well then again that's after
a few months of refurbishment.
The Merlin is hoping
to see up to 10 flights
without major refurbishment.
We know a design goal for
the BE-4 is to be reused
up to 25 times.
And I think the Raptor engine hopes to see
up to 50 flights but again
aspirations are one thing.
We'll see how history tweets its claims.
But one quick fun little story here is
don't forget the Merlin engine
which SpaceX currently uses
on the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets
are already fired a bunch of times
before they even make it to the pad.
Each engine that is built goes
from Hawthorne, California
to their test stand at McGregor, Texas,
where it does a full duration burn
then those engines go back to California
where they're integrated onto the Octaweb
which is at the base of the vehicle.
Then they take the entire stage
and they take it back out to McGregor
for a full duration static fire.
So it goes through the whole
mission basically again.
Then they ship it to the launch pad
where does a short static fire
and then it flies the mission.
So it's already done like three missions
in duration of firing
by the time it flies for the first time
so I'm not entirely
sure what the most times
a single engine has done
a full duration burn.
We know that some of the
cores were set out on the pad
and fired for a really
really really long time
multiple times over and over
so I think they've probably
done almost 10 flight
full duration burns
out of a single engine.
But you know I have no doubt
they can probably do that if they say.
I mean they have more experience in this
than anybody already
reusing engines without
really refurbishing them.
So I'm gonna definitely
take their word for it.
On the topic of price
there's actually some things here
that start to get really interesting
when we start looking at these numbers.
The first is an interesting metric
that Elan talked about once
in a tweet in February of 2019
saying they hope to make
the Raptor get better
at their thrust to dollar ratio.
Now this is a really interesting concept
when you think about it.
Who cares how much an engine costs
if one big engine is cheaper
than two smaller ones
for the same thrust or vice versa.
So let's actually take a look
at the dollar to kilonewton
ratio of these engines.
Starting with the most expensive
dollar to kilonewton
engine which is the RS-25
at a crazy $26,881 to kilonewton of thrust
then the RD-180 which is
$6527 to one kilonewton
followed by the F-1 at
$4431 per kilonewton
and then we get to the BE-4 which is $3333
to one kilonewton,
the Merlin engine at $1170 per kilonewton
and the Raptor at around
$1000 per kilonewton
but now we can go even
another step further
since we know their
dollar to kilonewton ratio
but we also know their
reusability potential.
Now we can predict
their potential costs
per kilonewton per flight
which changes based on how reusable
these engines actually are.
For start the RD-180
and the F-1 aren't reusable.
Their price stays the same
but for the rest of the engines,
if we take into account how many flights
they have/will have
now we start to see the
RS-25 reusability pay off
and kind of close the gap
bringing its potential cost
down to just $1414 per
kilonewton per flight.
But here's where things get crazy.
Blue Origin's BE-4 has potential
to truly be game changing
at around $133 per
kilonewton over 25 flights
which could make it
about as cheap to operate
as the Merlin at $117 per
kilonewton per flight.
But if the Raptor engine
truly lives up to its hype
it could bring this number
all the way down to $20 dollars
per kilonewton per flight.
Now that is absolutely game changing.
Sure, money and reuseability
is a 21st focus for spaceflight
but whatever happened to
good old proven reliability?
For this let's first look at
how many operational flights
each engine has had.
Now at the moment of shooting
this video the Raptor
and BE-4 haven't seen
any operational flights
although the Raptor is starting
to leave the test stand
and is being used on test
vehicles like the Starhopper.
But for now, neither engine
has a real flight record.
So let's look at the other engines.
First we have the F-1 engine
which was used on 17 flights.
Next up is the Merlin engine
which is at 71 flights
and catching up quickly to the RD-180
which is at 79 flights
but the king out of these was the RS-25
which saw 135 flights.
Now lastly, how about
reliability and service?
Between the number of
flights and this number
we can get a pretty good sense
of how truly reliable an engine is.
This number is really
hard to just pin down
since some of the engines
may have shut down early
but the mission was still a
success on a few of these.
So take a few of these
with a grain of salt.
Again the BE-4 and Raptor
engine haven't flown yet.
So those numbers are unavailable.
Then we have the space shuttle main engine
which is over 99.5% reliable
but that gets hard to define
when an engine doesn't fully shut down.
And then we have the
Merlin at 99.9% reliable.
It sure helps when you have 10 engines
on each flight of the vehicle
and with only one engine ever failing
early on in its career,
and despite that that
mission was still a success.
The Merlin is a very reliable engine.
Now to end this technically the RD-180
and the F-1 are 100% reliable
but with the F-1 never
having shut down at all
in any flight, it gets the bold here.
And depending on how you
define success and reliability
technically the RD-180 is
only kind of 100% reliable
because it got really lucky ones.
One time it shut down six seconds early
on an Atlas 5 mission in 2016.
This was due to a faulty valve
but the mission went on to be a success
because of some pure luck
with the center upper stage
having enough spare Delta V
to carry out the mission.
Had that valve failed
even a second earlier
that mission would have failed.
(dramatic music)
Seeing all these numbers
and considerations,
it makes you realize
just how many variables
go into designing a rocket.
Change any one little thing
and it can have this massive ripple effect
on the entire design
and the implementation of
the vehicle as a whole.
So let's go back over all of this.
Now that we know all
the cycles, the fuels,
the aspirations of SpaceX
to see if we can figure out
why the Raptor engine exists
and figure out if it's
worth all the effort.
Let's look at SpaceX's ultimate plan.
Make a rapidly and fully reusable vehicle
capable of sending humans to the Moon
and Mars as inexpensively
and routinely as possible.
Not exactly your everyday
goal for a rocket, huh?
In order to be rapidly
and fully reusable the
engine needs to run clean
and require low maintenance
with simple turbo pump seals
and low preburner temperatures.
A methane fueled full flow
staged combustion cycle engine
sounds like a good fit.
For reliability, redundancy,
and scale of manufacturing considerations
it makes sense to employ a lot of engines.
In order to scale an engine down
but maintain a high output
chamber pressure needs to be high.
Sounds like a methane fueled full flow
staged combustion cycle engine
is a good fit.
For interplanetary trips
methane makes the most sense
because its boiling point makes it usable
on long duration trips to Mars
which guess what?
You can produce methane on Mars.
So for interplanetary trips
a methane fueled full flow
staged combustion cycle
engine sounds like a good fit.
Methane is fairly dense
meaning the tank size remains reasonable.
Which again is good for
interplanetary trips
not needing to lug around
a lot of dead weight
making a methane fueled full
flow staged combustion cycle
a pretty good fit.
Okay so let's bring this
all back around now.
Is the Raptor engine really
the king of rocket engines?
Well rocket science like all things
is a complex series of compromises.
Is it the most efficient engine?
No.
Is it the most powerful engine?
Is it the cheapest engine?
Probably not.
Is it the most reusable engine?
Maybe.
But does it do everything really well?
Yeah it is truly a Goldilocks engine
doing everything it needs
to do very very well.
It is the perfect fit for
your interplanetary spaceship
and despite its complexity
SpaceX is developing this
engine at a rapid pace.
I mean knowing how much
tweaking SpaceX did
to their Merlin engine over a decade,
we're just at the infancy
of the Raptor engine.
It's only gonna get
better from here on out,
which is crazy.
So all in all the Raptor engine
is the king of this application.
It's a fantastic engine
to fulfill SpaceX's goals
for their starship vehicle.
Would it be the king
of other applications?
Maybe, maybe not.
And only that decision for the
rocket scientists and
engineers who get to make
all those crazy decisions
every single day.
So what do you think?
Is it worth all this hassle
to develop such a crazy
and complex engine?
Is this just the beginning
for the Raptor engine?
And most importantly,
is the Raptor engine really
the king of rocket engines?
Let me know your thoughts
in the comments below.
Okay I know I say this every video,
but I honestly could
not have done this video
without the help of my Patreon supporters.
They not only kept me sane
for the past five months
as I worked on this video
but they also went over
all the data with me.
They give me great feedback
and suggestions in the
edits of this video.
I you want to help support what I do
or provide feedback in videos
or help scripting research
or if you just want to hang out
and talk space
consider joining our
exclusive Discord channel
and our exclusive subreddit
by becoming a Patreon member
by going to Patreon.com/everydayastronaut.
Thank you guys.
Seriously, I couldn't have made this video
without you.
And while you're online,
be sure and check out my web store.
Seriously, I have really cool things
like these F-1 T-shirts,
tons of other shirts.
There's lots of new merchandise
popping up in there all the time
so check back often.
We have things like
grid fin not-a-coasters
and hats and shirts and mugs and prints,
just literally tons of cool rocket stuff.
So if that's your type of thing,
be sure and check out my web store
everydayastronaut.com/shop
and then click on the music tab
if you want to check out any of the songs
used in this video.
It's all music that I've
written over the years
(mumbles) Apple, iTunes and Spotify
and Google Music, all that stuff,
and also there's a playlist
right here on YouTube
for music video versions
of it too as well,
which is a fun way to watch and listen.
So show it to a friend.
Thanks everybody.
That's gonna do it for me.
I'm Tim Dodd, the Everyday Astronaut
bringing space down to
earth for everyday people.
(exit music)